
Atoms:

Each atom has protons, neutrons, and electrons. In any atom the number of protons and neutrons are the same.
Atoms typically only bond with other atoms if their valence (valence shells are the outmost shell in the atom)
electrons are compatible. Except for the transition metals (groups 3-12) in the periodic table, the atoms in each group 
follow a trend; each atom has a number of valence electrons equal to the last digit in their group number. For example, 
carbon is in group 14 so it has 4 valence electrons.

Bonding of atoms:

Atoms bond because they are more energetically stable. Atoms can form bonds with other atoms if their valence electron 
shells allow. There are 2 types of bonding that typically occur between atoms: Covalent and Ionic. The bond that forms between
two atoms depends on the electronegativity of the substance. Electronegativity is the quantity that measures how strongly the atom
can pull electrons away from other atoms. For example, Fluorine has an electronegativity of 4.0 which is the highest in the periodic
table. This means that it can very strongly pull electrons away from other atoms. Because fluorine can pull electrons away, it can bond
with a lot of elements. 

RULES FOR ATOMS:

To make a molecules from some atoms, find the total number of valence electrons from the atoms. Find the atom with the lowest electronegativity - that is the central
atom. Make bonds between each atom. Each bond uses two valence electrons, subtract that from the total. Use the remaining electrons to make sure each outside atom has
8 electrons around, including the two from the bonds. Then add the rest of the electrons around the centre atom. If the centre atom or the outside atoms have more or less
than 8 electrons in their inner or outer shell, more electron pairs can be shared to make sure each atom has the correct amount of electron pairs. Next adjust bonds so that
each atom's formal charge is minimised. Formula for the formal charge of an atom is: FC = # of valence electrons - non-bonding valence electrons - # of bonding electrons / 2.

Exceptions:

Beryllium (Be) and Boron (B) don't need an octet. BeCl2 and BCl3 are examples
They only need 2 and 3 bonds to atoms respectively.

Sulfur (S) and Phosphorous (P) can sometimes form 5 bonds e.g PCl5, 

Free Radicals:

If the total number of electrons are negative, we get a free radical. Subtract an electron
from the total number of valence electrons, then add it later to make the formal charge of an atom 0.

Turn into code ^^^. Need to add exceptions


