
Atoms:

Each atom has protons, neutrons, and electrons. In any atom the number of protons and neutrons are the same.
Atoms typically only bond with other atoms if their valence (valence shells are the outmost shell in the atom)
electrons are compatible. Except for the transition metals (groups 3-12) in the periodic table, the atoms in each group 
follow a trend; each atom has a number of valence electrons equal to the last digit in their group number. For example, 
carbon is in group 14 so it has 4 valence electrons.

Bonding of atoms:

Atoms bond because they are more energetically stable. Atoms can form bonds with other atoms if their valence electron 
shells allow. There are 2 types of bonding that typically occur between atoms: Covalent and Ionic. The bond that forms between
two atoms depends on the electronegativity of the substance. Electronegativity is the quantity that measures how strongly the atom
can pull electrons away from other atoms. For example, Fluorine has an electronegativity of 4.0 which is the highest in the periodic
table. This means that it can very strongly pull electrons away from other atoms. Because fluorine can pull electrons away, it can bond
with a lot of elements. 


RULES FOR ATOMS:

To make a molecules from some atoms, find the total number of valence electrons from the atoms. Find the atom with the lowest electronegativity - that is the central
atom. Make bonds between each atom. Each bond uses two valence electrons, subtract that from the total. Use the remaining electrons to make sure each outside atom has
8 electrons around, including the two from the bonds. Then add the rest of the electrons around the centre atom. Then take each 

- Two atoms can bond only if they can share electrons to make sure each atom has 8 electrons in its outer shell. Except for hydrogren, which
  has one electron and can only have one bond.
- When an atom shares its electrons due to a covalent bond, that means it can use the electrons shared by the other atom. For example, 
  oxygen has 6 valence electrons, and it needs 2 more to get to 8 electrons. If it shares an electron with two hydrogens which have
  one electron each, it will now have eight electrons and it is stable.
- Typically the maximum number of bonds that an atom can have is equal to its valence electrons. 
- If two atoms have a difference of electronegativity of 0.5 - 1.7, they will bond covalently (kind of strong). atoms will be near each other
- If two atoms have a difference of electronegativity greater than 1.7, they will bond ionically (very strong). atoms will be very close to each other
- If two atoms have a difference of electronegativity less than 0.5, they will bond non-covalently. not that far to each other.
- In a molecule the atom with the lowest electronegativity will be in the centre (if more than 2 atoms). Hydrogens are always on the outside of the atom.
  atoms have electron pairs. The number of electron pairs is determined by however many valence electrons that the molecule has.




